Unit 12. Generative models - Diffusion (#134)
johko/computer-vision-course: chapters/en/Unit 5 - Generative Models/Diffusion models/Simple explanation and showcase of external resources.mdx

# Extras

## Personalisation

> Although diffusion models and GANs can create many new, unique items, they aren't always able to create the specific thing you need. Hence, you have to fine-tune a model, which usually requires a lot of data and computation. However, some techniques can be used to personalize a model with just a few examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although diffusion models and GANs can create many new, unique items, they can't always create the specific thing you need. Hence, you have to fine-tune a model, which usually requires a lot of data and computation. However, some techniques can be used to personalize a model with just a few examples.
```

> Although diffusion models and GANs are able to create many new unique items, they aren't always able to create the specifc thing you need. Hence, you're left with having to fine tune a model, which usually requires a lot of data and compute. However, there are some techniques that can be used to personalise a model with just a few examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although diffusion models and GANs can create many new, unique items, they aren't always able to create the specific thing you need. Hence, you have to fine-tune a model, which usually requires a lot of data and computation. However, some techniques can be used to personalize a model with just a few examples.
```
Maybe you can have this section as a continuation in the introduction markdown

> One such example is Dreambooth by Google Research, a training technique that updates the entire diffusion model by training on just a few images of a subject or style. It works by associating a special word in the prompt with the example images. The details on Dreambooth can be found [on the papers page](https://dreambooth.github.io/) and the [Hugging Face Dreambooth training documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/training/dreambooth).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One example is Dreambooth by Google Research, a training technique that updates the entire diffusion model by training on just a few images of a subject or style. It works by associating a special word in the prompt with the example images. The details on Dreambooth can be found [on the papers page](https://dreambooth.github.io/) and the [Hugging Face Dreambooth training documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/training/dreambooth).
```

> Below you can see the results of Dreambooth being used to train on 4 images of a dog and some inference examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below, you can see the results of Dreambooth being used to train on 4 images of a dog and some inference examples.
```

> ![dog](https://dreambooth.github.io/DreamBooth_files/teaser_static.jpg). You can recreate the results following the above hugging face documentation.

Reviewer: Can you upload the image to hf-vision/course-assets and link from there?

> ![dog](https://dreambooth.github.io/DreamBooth_files/teaser_static.jpg). You can recreate the results following the above hugging face documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Dreambooth Dog Example](https://dreambooth.github.io/DreamBooth_files/teaser_static.jpg)
You can recreate the results following the Hugging Face documentation given above.
```

> From this example it's clear that the model has learnt that specific dog and is able to generate new images of that dog in diverse poses and backgrounds. Although the compute, data and time are an improvment, others have found more efficient ways to personalise a model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From this example, it's clear that the model has learned about that specific dog and can generate new images of that dog in diverse poses and backgrounds. Although computing, data, and time are improvements, others have found more efficient ways to customize a model.
```

> This is where the current most popular method for this comes in which is Low Rank Adaption (LoRA). This method was initially developed to efficiently fine-tune Large Language models by Microsoft in this [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685). The main idea is factorise the weight update matrix into a 2 low rank matricies, which are optimised during training whilst the rest of the model is frozen. [Hugging face documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/conceptual_guides/lora) has a good conceptual guide on how LoRA works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where the current most popular method for this comes in, which is Low Rank Adaptation (LoRA). This method was initially developed to efficiently fine-tune Large Language Models by Microsoft in this [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685). The main idea is to factorise the weight update matrix into 2 low-rank matrices, which are optimized during training whilst the rest of the model is frozen. [Hugging face documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/conceptual_guides/lora) has a good conceptual guide on how LoRA works.
```

> Now if we put those ideas together we can use LoRA to efficiently fine-tune a diffusion model on a few examples using Dreambooth. A tutorial Google Colab notebook on how to do this can be found [here](https://colab.research.google.com/github/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers/SDXL_DreamBooth_LoRA_.ipynb).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, if we put those ideas together we can use LoRA to efficiently fine-tune a diffusion model on a few examples using Dreambooth. A tutorial Google Colab notebook on how to do this can be found [here](https://colab.research.google.com/github/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers/SDXL_DreamBooth_LoRA_.ipynb).
```

> Due to the quality and efficiency of this method, many people have created their own LoRA parameters which many can be found on a website called [Civitai](https://civitai.com/models). Here you can downloads the LoRA weights which usually are in the range of 50-500MB and can be loaded into their corresponding diffusion model like so:

Reviewer: I think there's also many LoRAs hosted on HF, there's even a gallery for LoRAs that you can give a link to: https://huggingface.co/spaces/multimodalart/LoraTheExplorer

```python
model = "stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0"
pipe = StableDiffusionXLPipeline.from_pretrained(model,torch_dtype=torch.float16)
pipe.load_lora_weights("lora_weights.safetensors")
pipe.fuse_lora(lora_scale=0.8)

> ```

Reviewer 2: maybe add the `import` line(s), so people are not confused where you get the `StableDiffusionXLPipeline` from

Reviewer: Maybe you could also install diffusers above if it works for those who don't know 😊

Reviewer 3: Added both

This makes it quick to load a customised diffusion model and use it for inference, especially with how many models there are to choose from. Then if we want to remove the LoRA weights we can call `pipe.unfuse_lora()` which will return the model to its original state. As for the `lora_scale` parameter, this is a hyperparameter that controls how much the LoRA weights are used during inference. A value of 1.0 means the LoRA weights are fully used and a value of 0.0 means the LoRA weights are not used at all. The best value is often between 0.7 and 1.0 but it's worth experimenting with different values to see what works best for your use case.

## Guided Diffusion via ControlNet

> Diffusion models have many ways in which they can be guided to create a desired ouput, such as prompts, negative prompt, guidance scale, inpaiting and many others. Here, we will focus on a method that has many variants and can be combined with all the other methods, which is called ControlNet. It was introduced in this [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.05543) by Stanford University. This method allows us to guide the diffusion model with an image which usually holds very specific information such as depth, pose, edges and many others. This allows for more consitency in the generated images which often is a problem with diffusion models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Diffusion models have many ways in which they can be guided to create a desired output, such as prompts, negative prompts, guidance scale, inpainting and many others. Here, we will focus on a method that has many variants and can be combined with all the other methods, called ControlNet. It was introduced in this [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.05543) by Stanford University. This method allows us to guide the diffusion model with an image that usually holds very specific information such as depth, pose, edges, and many others. This allows for more consistency in the generated images, which is often a problem with diffusion models.
```

> ControlNet can be used in both text to image and image to image. Below is a text 2 image example using a ControlNet which was trained on edge detection conditioning, with the top left image being used as input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ControlNet can be used in both text-to-image and image-to-image. Below is a text 2 image example using a ControlNet which was trained on edge detection conditioning, with the top left image being used as input.
```

Now, if we put those ideas together we can use LoRA to efficiently fine-tune a diffusion model on a few examples using Dreambooth. A tutorial Google Colab notebook on how to do this can be found [here](https://colab.research.google.com/github/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers/SDXL_DreamBooth_LoRA_.ipynb).

Due to the quality and efficiency of this method, many people have created their own LoRA parameters which many can be found on a website called [Civitai](https://civitai.com/models) and [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/collections/multimodalart/awesome-sdxl-loras-64f9af6d5cce4f4e8f351466). 
For Civitai you can download the LoRA weights which usually are in the range of 50-500MB and in the case of Hugging Face version you can just load the model directly from the model hub.
Below is an example of how to load the LoRA weights in both cases and then fuse them with the model.

>  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 We can start with installing diffusers library.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
pip install diffusers
```
```

```python

> !pip install diffusers # Install diffusers library if you haven't already

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

from diffusers import StableDiffusionXLPipeline
import torch

model = "stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0"
pipe = StableDiffusionXLPipeline.from_pretrained(model,torch_dtype=torch.float16)

> pipe.load_lora_weights("lora_weights.safetensors") # Civitai

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pipe.load_lora_weights("lora_weights.safetensors") # if you want to install from a weight file
```

> pipe.load_lora_weights("ostris/crayon_style_lora_sdxl") # Hugging Face

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pipe.load_lora_weights("ostris/crayon_style_lora_sdxl") # if you wish to install a lora from a repository directly
```
